Overhaul "Defining a schema" documentation (#3662)
ChilliCream/hotchocolate: website/src/docs/hotchocolate/defining-a-schema/mutations.md

---
title: "Mutations"
---

import { ExampleTabs } from "../../../components/mdx/example-tabs"

> The mutation type in GraphQL is used to mutate/change data. This means that when we are doing mutations, we are causing side-effects to the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mutation type in GraphQL is used to mutate/change data. This means that when we are doing mutations, we are intending to cause side-effects in the system.
```

GraphQL defines mutations as top-level fields on the mutation type. Meaning only the fields on the mutation root type itself are mutations. Everything that is returned from a mutation field represents the changed state of the server.

```sdl
type Mutation {
  addBook(input: AddBookInput!): AddBookPayload!
  publishBook(input: PublishBookInput!): PublishBookPayload!
}
```

Clients can execute one or more mutations through the mutation type.

```graphql
mutation {
  addBook(input: { title: "C# in depth" }) {
    book {
      id
      title
    }
  }
  publishBook(input: { id: 1 }) {
    book {
      publishDate
    }
  }
}
```

> Each of these mutations is executed serially one by one whereas their child selection sets are executed possibly in parallel since only the top-level mutation fields are allowed to have side-effects in GraphQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these mutations is executed serially one by one whereas their child selection sets are executed possibly in parallel since only top-level mutation fields (those directly under `mutation`) are allowed to cause side-effects in GraphQL.
```
